Evaluating AGENTS.md:
Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Thibaud Gloaguen 1 Niels Mündler 1 Mark Müller 2 Veselin Raychev 2 Martin Vechev 1

Abstract

A widespread practice in software development
is to tailor coding agents to repositories using
context files, such as AGENTS.md, by either man-
ually or automatically generating them. Al-
though this practice is strongly encouraged by
there is currently no rigor-
agent developers,
ous investigation into whether such context files
are actually effective for real-world tasks.
In
this work, we study this question and evaluate
coding agents’ task completion performance in
two complementary settings: established SWE-
bench tasks from popular repositories, with
LLM-generated context files following agent-
developer recommendations, and a novel col-
lection of issues from repositories containing
developer-committed context files.

Across multiple coding agents and LLMs, we
find that context files tend to reduce task suc-
cess rates compared to providing no repository
context, while also increasing inference cost by
over 20%. Behaviorally, both LLM-generated
and developer-provided context files encourage
broader exploration (e.g., more thorough testing
and file traversal), and coding agents tend to re-
spect their instructions. Ultimately, we conclude
that unnecessary requirements from context files
make tasks harder, and human-written context
files should describe only minimal requirements.

6
2
0
2

b
e
F
2
1

]
E
S
.
s
c
[

1
v
8
8
9
1
1
.
2
0
6
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

1. Introduction

Coding agents are being rapidly adopted across the soft-
ware engineering industry (Sarkar, 2025), and providing
context files like AGENTS.md, a README specifically target-
ing agents, has become common practice. With various in-

1Department

of Computer
Correspondence

2LogicStar.ai.
<thibaud.gloaguen@inf.ethz.ch>,
<niels.mundler@inf.ethz.ch>.

Science,
to:

ETH Zurich
Thibaud Gloaguen
Mündler

Niels

Preprint. February 13, 2026.

1

dustry leaders (AGENTS.md, 2025; Anthropic, 2025b) rec-
ommending this approach to adapt their agents to specific
repositories, context files are now supported by most pop-
ular agent frameworks, and included in over 60’000 open-
source repositories at the time of writing, as reported by
AGENTS.md (2025).

These context files typically contain a repository overview
and information on relevant developer tooling, aiming to
help coding agents to navigate a given repository more ef-
ficiently, run build and test commands correctly, adhere to
style guides and design patterns, and ultimately to solve
tasks to the user’s satisfaction more frequently. To date, de-
spite their widespread adoption, the impact of context files
on the coding agent’s ability to solve complex software en-
gineering tasks has not been rigorously studied. This is
due to two key challenges: i) because of their recent intro-
duction, context files are not available for instances of prior
benchmarks, and ii) popular, well-known repositories, typi-
cally used to create such benchmarks, are not representative
of most codebases. As a result, a rigorous evaluation of the
context files used in practice requires a new, complemen-
tary benchmark that contains only issues from less popular
repositories with developer-committed context files.

This work: Benchmarking context files’ impact on re-
solving GitHub issues
In this work, we investigate the
effect of actively used context files on the resolution of
real-world coding tasks. We evaluate agents both in pop-
ular and less-known repositories, and, importantly, with
context files provided by repository developers. For this
purpose, we construct a novel benchmark (Figure 1, left),
AGENTBENCH, comprising Python software engineering
tasks, created specifically from real GitHub issues. The
benchmark contains 138 unique instances, covering both
bug-fixing and feature addition tasks across 12 recent and
niche repositories, which all feature developer-written con-
text files. AGENTBENCH complements SWE-BENCH
LITE, which we leverage for the evaluation of automati-
cally generated context files on popular repositories. We
evaluate coding agents in three settings (Figure 1, mid-
dle): without any context file, with context files automat-
ically generated using agent-developer recommendations,
and with the developer-provided context file. Our code

 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 1. Overview of our evaluation pipeline. We begin with real-world repositories and tasks derived from past pull requests. For
each repository state, we generate three settings: 1⃝ If a developer-provided context file exists, we include it in the repository. In 2⃝, we
3⃝ We use the coding agent’s recommended settings to generate the context file. Then we pass the repository and
omit the context file.
context file to the coding agent and instruct it to autonomously resolve the task. We finally analyze the trace for behavioral changes and
apply the generated patch to check for task resolution success.

to generate AGENTBENCH instances and evaluate coding
agents is available here.

Surprisingly, we observe that developer-provided files only
marginally improve performance compared to omitting
them entirely (an increase of 4% on average), while LLM-
generated context files have a small negative effect on agent
performance (a decrease of 3% on average). These ob-
servations are robust across different LLMs and prompts
used to generate the context files. In a more detailed anal-
ysis (Figure 1, right), we observe that context files lead
to increased exploration, testing, and reasoning by coding
agents, and, as a result, increase costs by over 20%. We
therefore suggest omitting LLM-generated context files for
the time being, contrary to agent developers’ recommenda-
tions, and including only minimal requirements (e.g., spe-
cific tooling to use with this repository). We hope our eval-
uation framework will aid agent and model developers to
improve the helpfulness of LLM-generated context files.

Key contributions Our key contributions are:

1. AGENTBENCH, a new curated benchmark for the im-
pact of actively used context files on agents’ ability to
solve real-world software engineering tasks.

2. An extensive evaluation of different coding agents
and underlying models on AGENTBENCH and SWE-
BENCH LITE, showing that LLM-generated context
files tend to decrease agent performance, across mod-
els or prompts used to generate them, while developer-
written context files tend to slightly improve it.

3. A detailed investigation of agent traces, showing that
context files lead to more thorough testing and explo-
ration by coding agents.

2. Background and Related Work

Coding agents Coding agents are LLM-based systems
designed for autonomous resolution of coding tasks (Yang
et al., 2024). Typically, they consist of a harness that al-
lows an LLM to interact with its environment using spe-
cialized tools for, e.g., executing bash commands, conduct-
ing web searches, or reading, creating, or modifying files
(Wang et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024).

Their impressive performance on repository-level coding
tasks like SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) led to rapid
adoption in the software engineering community (Sarkar,
2025) and the development of new agents by specialized
companies (Aider, 2024; Wang et al., 2025) and model
providers (OpenAI, 2025c; Google, 2025; QwenLM, 2025;
Anthropic, 2025a). Model providers now train their LLMs
to use the tools exposed by their harnesses (QwenLM,
2025), which can substantially improve coding ability rela-
tive to simpler harnesses (Lieret et al., 2025). Accordingly,
in §4, we evaluate each LLM only within its corresponding
harness.

Context files As coding agents were more broadly
adopted, a common need arose to provide the agent with
additional context about novel and little-known codebases
(Boyina, 2025; Sewell, 2025). To address this issue, model
and agent developers recommend including context files,
such as AGENTS.md or CLAUDE.md, with codebases (OpenAI,
2025a; Anthropic, 2025b). Many agent harnesses provide
built-in commands to initialize such context files automat-
ically using the coding agent itself, e.g., by providing a
dedicated /init command in the agent interface (OpenAI,
2025c; QwenLM, 2025; Anthropic, 2025a). At the time of
writing, AGENTS.md (2025) report that over 60’000 pub-
lic GitHub repositories include a context file.

2

CodingAgentDeveloperRepositoryNo InstructionssrctestsREADME.mdbuild.shDev-providedinstructionLLM-generatedinstructions TaskAdd support for chained comparisonOk lets see..ls -laI need to edit x.pysed xyzNow I should formatruff x.py+ def foo():+    return bar- def fooz():-    passAutonomousTaskSolvingTest evaluationTrace analysisBehavioralChangesModelPerformanceEvaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Evaluating context files Prior work collected and cat-
egorized the content of context files (Chatlatanagulchai
et al., 2025; Mohsenimofidi et al., 2025), deriving mostly
descriptive metrics about their content without investigat-
ing their effectiveness (Nigh, 2025). While individual de-
velopers report anecdotal evidence of better alignment and
solution capabilities when providing context files (Sewell,
2025; Sawers, 2025), we are the first to investigate the im-
pact of actively used context files on agent behavior and
performance at scale.

Repository-level evaluation Spearheaded by Jimenez
et al. (2024), evaluating coding agents on the autonomous
resolution of real-world repository-level tasks quickly be-
came the gold standard for assessing their capabilities.
While initial work focuses on issue resolution (Jimenez
et al., 2024), follow-up work proposed benchmarks on fea-
ture addition (Li et al., 2025; Du et al., 2025), unit test gen-
eration (Mündler et al., 2024), function generation (Liang
et al., 2024), code performance (He et al., 2025), and se-
curity (Chen et al., 2025). Our work evaluates whether au-
tonomous issue resolution and feature addition capabilities
improve with actively used context files.

Orthogonally, benchmarks have also been extended by
mining more recent and more difficult problems (Badert-
dinov et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a), as well as in-
stances focusing on end-user applications (Vergopoulos
et al., 2025). We follow their approaches to mining novel
task instances to obtain a specialized set of tasks in reposi-
tories that feature context files.

3. AGENTBENCH

In this Section, we discuss the requirements for AGENT-
BENCH, a SWE-BENCH-like benchmark that targets the
evaluation of developer-provided context files, its genera-
tion process, and its statistics.

3.1. Notation and Definitions

We first introduce the notation to describe codebases, their
test suites, and changes to these codebases in the form of
patches. Following the notation of Mündler et al. (2024),
we denote a codebase, or repository R after applying patch
X as R ◦ X. Several patches can be applied sequentially,
i.e., R◦X ◦Y is the codebase R after applying a first patch
X and then a second one Y .

A test suite T is a collection of tests that is used to vali-
date the functionality of code in the repository. Executing
a test suite T on repository state R returns execR(T ) ∈
{PASS, FAIL} either indicating that all tests in the suite
passed or that at least one test failed. An issue I is
a task for autonomous completion by the coding agent,

such as resolving a bug or implementing a requested
feature. We denote quadruples of (I, R, T , X ∗) as in-
stances, where the coding agent is tasked with predicting
a patch ˆX given issue I and repository state R such that
execR◦ ˆX (T ) = PASS, and X ∗ is the golden patch for that
instance. We define the success rate S as the percentage of
predicted patches ˆXi for instances (Ii, Ri, Ti, X ∗
i ) where
execRi◦ ˆXi

(Ti) = PASS.

3.2. Generation of AGENTBENCH Instances

To construct AGENTBENCH, we use a five-stage construc-
tion process summarized below. We defer all the prompts
used for this process to §B.

Requirements We aim to evaluate the impact of both au-
tomatically generated context files and developer-written
context files on the success rate of coding agents on real-
world tasks and codebases. The primary source for real-
world codebases is open-source projects and their publicly
tracked and documented changes, so-called pull requests
(PRs). In order to obtain developer-written context files,
we need to source PRs from projects that adopted context
files. This is challenging, because context files have only
been formalized in August 2025, and have not been fre-
quently used before. Further, the adoption of context file is
not uniform across the industry: even at the time of writing,
many repositories do not include context files.

Finding repositories We first use GitHub search to build
a list of potential candidate repositories to extract instances
from. Specifically, we select codebases that contain a con-
text file such as AGENTS.md or CLAUDE.md at the root di-
rectory. Next, we filter down to those using Python as the
main language and featuring a test suite. Finally, we filter
for projects with many publicly documented changes, re-
quiring at least 400 PRs. This criterion allows us to select
codebases from which we can extract at least 10 instances
after our rigorous post-processing.

Filtering pull requests Given a repository, we filter PRs
to retain those that are most likely to generate higher-
quality instances using a combination of rule-based checks
and an LLM agent. We only keep PRs that satisfy the fol-
lowing two criteria: they should reference at least one is-
sue, and they should modify at least one Python file. Fur-
ther, we filter for PRs that are assessed by the agent to intro-
duce deterministic, testable behaviors that are suitable for
SWE-BENCH LITE-like regression tests. We notice that,
because the use of context files is a recently emerging trend,
most repositories containing context files are niche. These
niche repositories have less strict rules regarding pull re-
quests, and thus most PRs may not include specific tests.
To enable building instances from these more niche repos-

3

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

itories, we therefore do not require PRs to edit unit tests
that validate the code changes, in contrast to SWE-BENCH
LITE, which focused on large and popular repositories and
requires PRs to contain unit tests.

Environment Set-Up For every PR and corresponding
repository state, we set up an execution environment such
that its test suite can be run, using a coding agent. Specifi-
cally, we ask the agent to produce a small script that i) sets
up the execution environment, ii) runs the test suite and iii)
stores the results as a machine-readable dictionary at the
root of the repository. We only keep PRs where the re-
sulting dictionary contains at least one passing test, which
corresponds to 87% of the filtered instances.

Task Descriptions Many of the smaller repositories we
used to source AGENTBENCH do not enforce strict re-
quirements on the quality of PR and issue descriptions. As
a result, many issues are too imprecise and underspecified
to solve the task in a testable manner (e.g., in some cases,
the PR body is empty). Further, some PRs implement new
features, which would require detailed descriptions about
expected behavior and interfaces. We therefore use a third
LLM agent to produce a standardized and detailed task de-
scription I based on the PR description, associated issues if
available, and the original patch X ∗. This standardized task
description is divided into 6 sections: description, steps to
reproduce, expected behavior, observed behavior, specifi-
cation, and additional information. Importantly, we ask the
agent not to leak the solution in the generated task descrip-
tion, and to provide precise specifications. We randomly
sampled and inspected 10% of the generated instances, and
found that none of them leaked the solution.

Generating Unit Tests As most collected PRs do not
modify or add unit tests that we could use to check the
correctness of any given implementation, we use an LLM
agent to generate such unit tests. We provide the agent with
the standardized task description I, the test files modified
by the PR, if available, the original code changes X ∗ made
by the PR, and the base state of the repository R. We then
ask it to generate tests that pass for any implementation
that resolves the described task. We verify that the added
tests fail on R and pass on R ◦ X ∗. Finally, we manually
improve tests that are over-specified (i.e., tests that check
for implementation details not specified in the task descrip-
tion), resulting in newly generated tests T X
. We further
determine all tests of the repository test suite T R
that pass
on the patched code, i.e., the maximal set T R∗
, such
(T R∗
that execRi◦X ∗
) = PASS, and obtain the final test set
i
Ti = T X
i ⊎ T R∗
. The resulting tests achieve an average
coverage of 75% of the modified code (see Table 1).

i
i ⊆ T R
i

i

i

i

Figure 2. Distribution of AGENTBENCH instances across 12
open-source GitHub repositories, each containing context files.

Table 1. Average, minimum, and maximum of key statistics of
AGENTBENCH across the 138 instances. For context files, a sec-
tion is the content between Markdown headers.

PR body

Issue I

# words

# words

Mean Min Max

415.3

211.6

5

96

4961

500

Codebase

# files

3337

151

26602

PR patch

# lines edited
# files edited

118.9
2.5

12
1

1973
23

Test

Coverage

75% 2.5% 100%

Context file

# words
# sections

641.0
9.7

24
1

2003
29

Evaluation We thus obtain AGENTBENCH instances i,
each consisting of a task description Ii, a codebase Ri,
golden patch X ∗
i , and a set of tests Ti. During evaluation,
we first set up the environment before prompting the coding
agent with the task description Ii, retrieving the predicted
patch ˆXi, and measuring execRi◦ ˆXi

(Ti).

Overview of AGENTBENCH Using this process, we
obtained 138 instances from a total of 5694 PRs from 12
repositories that meet our criteria, using GPT-5.2 with
CODEX as the agent. We visualize the distribution over
repositories in Figure 2 and show key statistics of AGENT-
BENCH in Table 1. In comparison to SWE-BENCH LITE,
our dataset is both more evenly distributed over repositories
and has otherwise similar statistics.

4. Experimental Evaluation

In this Section, we investigate what effect context files
have on the behavior of coding agents and how strong this
effect is. To this end, we conduct an extensive evalua-
tion of various coding agents on SWE-BENCH LITE and
AGENTBENCH, considering both automatically generated
and developer-provided context files.

4

ragas(14)smolagents(16)openai-agents-python(17)transformers(6)pr-agent(10)graphiti(3)fastmcp(12)wagtail(12)opshin(14)ansible(11)pdm(10)tinygrad(13)1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 3. Resolution rate for 4 different models, without context files, with LLM-generated context files, and with developer-written
context files, on SWE-BENCH LITE (left) and AGENTBENCH (right).

4.1. Experimental Setup

We describe the experimental setup below, deferring fur-
ther details to §A.1.

Coding Agents We consider four coding agents, paired
with suitable models: CLAUDE CODE (Anthropic, 2025a)
with SONNET-4.5 (Anthropic, 2025), CODEX (OpenAI,
2025c) with GPT-5.2 and GPT-5.1 MINI (Singh et al.,
2026), and QWEN CODE (QwenLM, 2025) with QWEN3-
30B-CODER (Team, 2025). For CLAUDE CODE, we use
the default settings and set the temperature of SONNET-
4.5 to 0. Similarly, for CODEX, we also use the default
settings and set the temperature of GPT-5.2 and GPT-5.1
MINI to 0. For QWEN CODE, we enable chat compres-
sion upon reaching 60% of the total context limit (set to
256K tokens), restrict shell outputs to 2000 tokens, and set
the temperature of QWEN3-30B-CODER to 0.7 with top-p
sampling at 0.8. We deploy QWEN3-30B-CODER locally
using vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023). We sample completions
for each agent once. For all agents, the context file is fed
into their context, either by writing it to AGENTS.md for
CODEX and QWEN CODE, or to CLAUDE.md for CLAUDE
CODE.

Datasets We use SWE-BENCH LITE (Jimenez et al.,
2024), which consists of 300 tasks sourced from GitHub
issues across 11 popular Python repositories, none contain-
ing developer-written context files, and our novel AGENT-
BENCH, consisting of 138 instances from 12 repositories,
all containing developer-provided context files (see §3).

Settings We consider three context file settings:

NONE: No context files are available, i.e., we remove

developer-provided files for AGENTBENCH.

LLM: An LLM-generated context file is available.
We use the recommended initialization command and
model for each agent individually to generate the con-
text file using the pre-patch repository state R.

Table 2. The average number of steps (lower is better) and exe-
cution cost (in USD — lower is better) per SWE-BENCH LITE
and AGENTBENCH instance without context files (NONE), with
LLM-generated context files (LLM), and with developer-written
context files (HUM). We bold the best setting.

Type

NONE

LLM

NONE

LLM

HUM.

SONNET-4.5

GPT-5.2

GPT-5.1 M. QWEN3-30B

Steps Cost

Steps Cost

Steps Cost

Steps

Cost

54.4

57.2

40.7

46.5

45.3

1.30

1.51

1.15

1.33

1.30

12.5

12.7

12.1

13.1

13.6

0.32

0.43

0.38

0.57

0.54

40.9

45.2

40.6

46.9

46.6

0.18

0.22

0.18

0.20

0.19

29.7

32.2

31.5

34.2

32.8

0.12

0.13

0.13

0.15

0.15

SWE-
BENCH
LITE

AGENT-
BENCH

HUMAN: A developer-provided context file is avail-
able. We use the context file of the pre-patch repos-
itory state R. Only available for AGENTBENCH.

Metrics The main metric for agent performance is suc-
cess rate (§3.1), i.e., the portion of instances for which the
agent produces a patch that leads to all tests passing. We
additionally consider the number of steps the agent requires
to complete a task. Each step is one interaction with the
environment, e.g., calling a shell tool or modifying a file.
Finally, we report the total cost of LLM inference required
to complete a task. For QWEN3-30B-CODER, we estimate
the cost from the average OpenRouter API price.

4.2. Main Results

LLM-generated context files increase cost and reduce
performance LLM-generated context files cause perfor-
mance drops in 5 out of 8 settings across SWE-BENCH
LITE and AGENTBENCH (see Figure 3). In more detail,
the average resolution rate is reduced by 0.5% and 2% on
average on SWE-BENCH LITE and AGENTBENCH, re-
spectively. Meanwhile, the context files increase the # steps
in every setting on average by 2.45 and 3.92 steps, respec-
tively, which leads to a cost increase of 20% and 23% on
average, respectively (see Table 2).

5

Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B30405060Successrate(%)−→NoneLLM1Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B3040506070Successrate(%)−→NoneLLMHuman1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 4. Number of steps before the first interaction between the agent and a file included in the PR patch (lower is better)
is generally lower without context files than with LLM-generated context files or with developer-written context files (Human) on
SWE-BENCH LITE (left) and AGENTBENCH (right).

Human context files increase cost and performance
We observe that the developer-provided context files out-
perform the LLM-generated ones for all four agents, de-
spite not being agent-specific, and improve the perfor-
mance compared to no context files for all agents but
CLAUDE CODE (see Figure 3 right). However, developer-
provided context files also increase the average number of
steps and costs required to solve the task, on average by
3.34 steps and at most 19%, respectively.

Context files do not provide effective overviews One
recommendation for context files is to include a codebase
overview (AGENTS.md, 2025). Across the 12 developer-
provided context files in AGENTBENCH, 8 include a dedi-
cated codebase overview, with 4 explicitly enumerating and
describing the directories and subdirectories in the reposi-
tory. Similarly, both the CODEX and QWEN CODE con-
text file generation prompts explicitly instruct the agent
to include an overview section, while the CLAUDE CODE
prompt advocates for a high-level overview only and warns
against listing components that are easily discoverable.
We use GPT-OSS-120B to assess which of the LLM-
generated context files contain codebase overviews. Sur-
prisingly, 100% of SONNET-4.5-generated context files are
flagged for overviews, and 95% and 99% for QWEN3-30B-
CODER and GPT-5.2 respectively. Only GPT-5.1 MINI
has significantly fewer overviews (36%).

To assess the usefulness of these overviews, we measure
how quickly agents discover files relevant to the described
issue I. Concretely, we measure the average number of
steps before the coding agent interacts with any file mod-
ified in the original PR patch X ∗. We exclude the 3%
of instances in which the agent never interacts with any
file modified in X ∗. Both on SWE-BENCH LITE and
AGENTBENCH the presence of context files does not
meaningfully reduce this metric, as shown in Figure 4.

While context files appear to increase the number of re-
quired steps significantly for GPT-5.1 MINI, we observe

Figure 5. When removing all documentation-related files from
the codebase, LLM-generated context files tend to outperform
developer-provided (Human) ones on AGENTBENCH .

in manual trace inspection that this increase is due to it (i)
issuing multiple commands to find the context files and (ii)
reading them (multiple times) despite them being already
included in the agent’s context. Interestingly, we only ob-
served this behavior if context files were present at all. We
conclude that context files, even developer-provided ones,
are not effective at providing a repository overview.

Context files are redundant documentation Our hy-
pothesis is that LLM-generated context files are highly
redundant with existing documentation, while developer-
provided context files add additional information. To con-
firm this, we manually remove all documentation (files end-
ing with .md, example code, and the folder docs/) after
generating the context file, and before evaluating the cod-
ing agents. We show the results in Figure 5, excluding
CLAUDE CODE due to its hight cost. In this setting, where
context files are the only source of documentation avail-
able, LLM-generated context files not only consistently im-
prove performance by 2.7% on average, but also outper-
form developer-written documentation. This may explain
anecdotal evidence reporting that coding agents perform
better after adding context files (Sewell, 2025), since many
less popular repositories contain little to no documentation.

6

Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B05101520←−#Steps1stInteractionNoneLLM1Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B051015←−#Steps1stInteractionNoneLLMHuman1GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B3040506070Successrate(%)−→NoneLLMHuman1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 6. Increase in average tool use when including LLM-generated (bright green) or developer-provided (dark green) context files,
compared to the average tool use without context files. For tool names, we map CODEX and QWEN CODE tools to the CLAUDE CODE
equivalents (we detail the mapping in §A).

4.3. Trace analysis

We now analyze the impact of context files on agent behav-
ior in more detail by analysing the frequency of agent tool
calls and length of reasoning traces. We describe our setup
in more detail in §B.2.

Context files lead to more testing and exploration In
Figure 6, we show the increase in average tool use when
including LLM-generated (bright green) or developer-
provided (dark green) context files. Negative values im-
ply a decrease in tool use. We find that, across all mod-
els, when context files are present, the coding agents run
more tests. They also tend to navigate the repository more:
they search more files (grep), read more files, and write
more files. Lastly, adding context files causes agents to use
more repository-specific tooling (e.g., uv and repo_tool).
In Figure 10 (§A), we perform a similar analysis using the
intent of the tool call, leading to the same conclusion.

Instructions in context files are typically followed We
find that agents generally follow instructions present in the
context files. For instance, uv is used 1.6 times per instance
on average when mentioned in the context files, compared
to fewer than 0.01 times when it is not mentioned, and
repository-specific tools are used 2.5 times per instance
on average when mentioned, compared to fewer than 0.05
times when they are not mentioned. This effect is observ-
able across almost all measured tools displayed in Figure 6,
as we show in a more in-depth analysis in §A. In particular,
this result implies that the absence of improvements with
context files is not due to a lack of instruction-following.

Following context files requires more thinking We hy-
pothesize that these additional instructions make the task
harder. To confirm this, we analyze the average number of
reasoning tokens used by GPT-5.2 and GPT-5.1 MINI, as
their adaptive reasoning (OpenAI, 2025b) allows them to

Figure 7. Number of reasoning tokens spent on average by
GPT-5.2 and GPT-5.1 MINI, without context files, with LLM-
generated context files, and with developer-written context files,
on SWE-BENCH LITE (left) and AGENTBENCH (right).

use more reasoning tokens for tasks that they deem harder.
In Figure 7, we show that LLM-generated context files in-
deed increase the average number of reasoning tokens by
22% for GPT-5.2 and 14% for GPT-5.1 MINI on SWE-
BENCH LITE (respectively 14% and 10% on AGENT-
BENCH), and that developer-written context files increase
the number of reasoning tokens by 20% and 2% for GPT-
5.2 and GPT-5.1 MINI, respectively.

4.4. Ablations

In this Section we analyze differences between the context
files generated by different models, and the impact of the
prompt used to create the context files.

Stronger models don’t generate better context files We
compare context files generated with GPT-5.2 + CODEX
to those created by our standard agents in Figure 8. This
improves performance on SWE-BENCH LITE across all
models (2% on average), but degrades performance on
AGENTBENCH across all models (3% on average). We

7

01EditWriteGrepReadTodoWritepytestpythonfindlsshellgitpiprepo_tooluvSonnet-4.5024GPT-5.201GPT-5.1Mini−0.50.00.5Qwen3-30BLLMHuman1GPT-5.2GPT-5.1Mini010,00020,00030,00040,00050,00060,000#ofreasoningtokensNoneLLMHumanNoneLLM1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

knowledge about tooling, dependencies, and other reposi-
tory specifics might be present in the models’ parametric
knowledge, nullifying the effect of context files. Future
work may investigate the effect of context files on more
niche programming languages and toolchains that are less
represented in the training data, and known to be more diffi-
cult for LLMs (Cassano et al., 2022; Orlanski et al., 2023).

Context files beyond task resolution In this work, we
evaluate the impact of context files on task resolution rate.
However, there are many other relevant aspects of coding
agents, such as code efficiency (He et al., 2025) and secu-
rity (Chen et al., 2025), that we believe could be explored
in future work. Specifically, for security, prior work found
that prompting LLMs to generate secure code significantly
improves the security of generated code (Vero et al., 2025).

Improving context file generation Another interesting
avenue opened by this work is how to improve the auto-
matic generation of useful context files. Here, human de-
velopers appear to dominate per our evaluation. Several
related works in the direction of planning and continuous
learning from prior tasks may be applicable for this task
(Suzgun et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025b; Cheng et al.,
2025). By tackling this challenge, future agents could gain
a long-term capability at meaningful self-improvement.

6. Conclusion

We present an extensive evaluation of the impact of con-
text files on coding agent performance for four common
coding agents on SWE-BENCH LITE and AGENTBENCH.
The latter is a new benchmark we built from recent GitHub
issues and less popular repositories containing developer-
written context files. We find that all context files consis-
tently increase the number of steps required to complete
tasks. LLM-generated context files have a marginal neg-
ative effect on task success rates, while developer-written
ones provide a marginal performance gain.

Our trace analyses show that instructions in context files
are generally followed and lead to more testing and a
broader exploration, however they do not function as effec-
tive repository overviews. Overall, our results suggest that
context files have only marginal effect on agent behavior,
and are likely only desirable when manually written. This
highlights a concrete gap between current agent-developer
recommendations and observed outcomes, and motivates
future work on principled ways to automatically generate
concise, task-relevant guidance for coding agents.

Figure 8. On SWE-BENCH LITE , performance is improved
with context files generated by GPT-5.2 compared to using the
model underlying the agent, while on AGENTBENCH perfor-
mance is degraded.

Figure 9. When generating context files using the prompt from
CODEX or from CLAUDE CODE on SWE-BENCH LITE and
AGENTBENCH , there is no consistent impact on success rate.

thus conclude that stronger models do not necessarily gen-
erate superior context files.

No difference between the specific prompts We com-
pare context files generated using the prompt of CODEX
and CLAUDE CODE across all agents and models in Fig-
ure 9.
Surprisingly, CLAUDE CODE performs better
with context files generated using the CODEX prompt,
while both GPT-5.2 and GPT-5.1 MINI perform better
on SWE-BENCH LITE with the CODEX prompt but worse
on AGENTBENCH. Overall, neither the prompt matching
the underlying model and agent, nor a specific prompt per-
forms consistently best, indicating that sensitivity to differ-
ent (good) prompts is generally small.

5. Limitations and Future Work

While our work addresses important shortcomings in the
literature, exciting opportunities for future research remain.

Niche programming languages The current evaluation
is focused heavily on Python. Since this is a language that
is widely represented in the training data, much detailed

8

Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B3040506070Successrate(%)−→Instructionby:OwnGPT-5.21Sonnet-4.5GPT-5.2GPT-5.1MiniQwen3-30B3040506070Successrate(%)−→Promptfrom:CodexClaudeCode1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

References

AGENTS.md. AGENTS.md - A simple, open format for
guiding coding agents, 2025. URL https://agents.m
d/.

Aider. AI pair programming in your terminal, 2024. URL

https://aider.chat.

Anthropic. Claude Code overview, 2025a. URL https:

//code.claude.com/docs/en/overview.

Anthropic. Using CLAUDE.md files: Customizing Claude
Code for your codebase, 2025b. URL https://claude
.com/blog/using-claude-md-files.

Anthropic. Claude Sonnet 4.5, 2025. URL https://www.

anthropic.com/news/claude-sonnet-4-5.

Badertdinov, I., Golubev, A., Nekrashevich, M., Shevtsov,
A., Karasik, S., Andriushchenko, A., Trofimova, M.,
Litvintseva, D., and Yangel, B. SWE-rebench: An Au-
tomated Pipeline for Task Collection and Decontami-
nated Evaluation of Software Engineering Agents. arXiv
preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.2
0411.

Boyina, G. Why I Created AGENTS.md: A Simple So-
lution to a Growing Problem, 2025. URL h t t p s :
//thegowtham.medium.com/why- i- created- agent
s-md-a-simple-solution-to-a-growing-problem-3
afc1f6211f7.

Cassano, F., Gouwar, J., Nguyen, D., Nguyen, S., Phipps-
Costin, L., Pinckney, D., Yee, M.-H., Zi, Y., Anderson,
C. J., Feldman, M. Q., et al. MultiPL-E: A Scalable
and Extensible Approach to Benchmarking Neural Code
Generation. arXiv preprint, 2022. URL https://arxi
v.org/abs/2208.08227.

Chatlatanagulchai, W., Li, H., Kashiwa, Y., Reid, B.,
Thonglek, K., Leelaprute, P., Rungsawang, A., Man-
askasemsak, B., Adams, B., Hassan, A. E., et al. Agent
READMEs: An Empirical Study of Context Files for
Agentic Coding. arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2511.12884.

Chen, J., Huang, H., Lyu, Y., An, J., Shi, J., Yang, C.,
Zhang, T., Tian, H., Li, Y., Li, Z., et al. SecureAgent-
Bench: Benchmarking Secure Code Generation under
Realistic Vulnerability Scenarios. arXiv preprint, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22097.

Cheng, Y., Wang, Z., Ma, W., Zhu, W., Deng, Y., and Zhao,
J. EvoCurr: Self-evolving Curriculum with Behavior
Code Generation for Complex Decision-making. arXiv
preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.0
9586.

Du, Y., Cai, Y., Zhou, Y., Wang, C., Qian, Y., Pang, X.,
Liu, Q., Hu, Y., and Chen, S. SWE-Dev: Evaluat-
ing and Training Autonomous Feature-Driven Software
arXiv preprint, 2025. URL h t t p s :
Development.
//arxiv.org/abs/2505.16975.

Google.

google-gemini/gemini-cli: An open-source AI
agent that brings the power of Gemini directly into your
terminal, 2025. URL https://github.com/google-g
emini/gemini-cli.

He, X., Liu, Q., Du, M., Yan, L., Fan, Z., Huang, Y., Yuan,
Z., and Ma, Z. SWE-Perf: Can Language Models Op-
timize Code Performance on Real-World Repositories?
arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2507.12415.

Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press,
O., and Narasimhan, K. R. SWE-bench: Can Language
In ICLR,
Models Resolve Real-world Github Issues?
2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VTF8
yNQM66.

Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu,
C. H., Gonzalez, J. E., Zhang, H., and Stoica, I. Efficient
Memory Management for Large Language Model Serv-
In Proceedings of the ACM
ing with PagedAttention.
SIGOPS 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Princi-
ples, 2023.

Li, W., Zhang, X., Guo, Z., Mao, S., Luo, W., Peng,
G., Huang, Y., Wang, H., and Li, S. FEA-Bench: A
Benchmark for Evaluating Repository-Level Code Gen-
eration for Feature Implementation. In ACL, 2025. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.839/.

Liang, S., Hu, Y., Jiang, N., and Tan, L. Can Language
Models Replace Programmers for Coding? REPOCOD
Says ’Not Yet’. arXiv preprint, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2410.21647.

Lieret, K., Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei,
K., Press, O., and Narasimhan, K. R. SWE-bench Bash
Only, 2025. URL https://www.swebench.com/bash-o
nly.html.

Mohsenimofidi, S., Galster, M., Treude, C., and Baltes, S.
Context Engineering for AI Agents in Open-Source Soft-
ware. arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2510.21413.

Mündler, N., Müller, M. N., He, J., and Vechev, M. T.
SWT-Bench: Testing and Validating Real-World Bug-
In NeurIPS, 2024. URL
Fixes with Code Agents.
http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/202
4/hash/94f093b41fc2666376fb1f667fe282f3-Abstr
act-Conference.html.

9

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Vergopoulos, K., Müller, M. N., and Vechev, M. Au-
tomated Benchmark Generation for Repository-Level
Coding Tasks. arXiv preprint, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2503.07701.

Vero, M., Mündler, N., Chibotaru, V., Raychev, V., Baader,
M., Jovanovic, N., He, J., and Vechev, M. T. BaxBench:
Can LLMs Generate Correct and Secure Backends? In
ICML, 2025.

Wang, X., Li, B., Song, Y., Xu, F. F., Tang, X., Zhuge, M.,
Pan, J., Song, Y., Li, B., Singh, J., et al. OpenHands: An
Open Platform for AI Software Developers as Generalist
Agents. In ICLR, 2025. URL https://openreview.n
et/forum?id=OJd3ayDDoF.

Yang, J., Jimenez, C. E., Wettig, A., Lieret, K., Yao, S.,
Narasimhan, K., and Press, O. SWE-agent: Agent-
Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engi-
neering. In NeurIPS, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5a7c947568c1b13
28ccc5230172e1e7c-Abstract-Conference.html.

Zhang, L., He, S., Zhang, C., Kang, Y., Li, B., Xie, C.,
Wang, J., Wang, M., Huang, Y., Fu, S., et al. SWE-
bench Goes Live! arXiv preprint, 2025a. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2505.23419.

Zhang, Q., Hu, C., Upasani, S., Ma, B., Hong, F., Kama-
nuru, V., Rainton, J., Wu, C., Ji, M., Li, H., et al. Agen-
tic Context Engineering: Evolving Contexts for Self-
Improving Language Models. arXiv preprint, 2025b.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04618.

Nigh, M. How to write a great agents.md: Lessons from
over 2,500 repositories, 2025. URL https://github.b
log/ai-and-ml/github-copilot/how-to-write-a-g
reat-agents-md-lessons-from-over-2500-reposit
ories/.

OpenAI. OpenAI co-founds the Agentic AI Foundation
under the Linux Foundation, 2025a. URL https://op
enai.com/index/agentic-ai-foundation/.

OpenAI. GPT-5.1: A smarter, more conversational Chat-
GPT, 2025b. URL https://openai.com/index/gpt-5
-1/.

OpenAI. openai/codex: Lightweight coding agent that runs
in your terminal, 2025c. URL https://github.com/o
penai/codex.

Orlanski, G., Xiao, K., Garcia, X., Hui, J., Howland, J.,
Malmaud, J., Austin, J., Singh, R., and Catasta, M. Mea-
suring the Impact of Programming Language Distribu-
tion. In ICML, 2023. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v202/orlanski23a.html.

QwenLM. QwenLM/Qwen3-Coder: Qwen3-Coder is the
code version of Qwen3, the large language model series
developed by Qwen team, Alibaba Cloud, 2025. URL
https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3-Coder.

Sarkar, S. K. Ai agents, productivity, and higher-order
thinking: Early evidence from software development.
Available at SSRN 5713646, 2025.

Sawers, P. The Rise of Agents.md, an Open Standard and
Single Source of Truth for AI Coding Agents, 2025.
URL https://tessl.io/blog/the- rise- of- agent
s-md-an-open-standard-and-single-source-of-t
ruth-for-ai-coding-agents/.

Sewell, S. Improve your AI code output with AGENTS.md
(+ my best tips), 2025. URL https://www.builder.io
/blog/agents-md.

Singh, A., Fry, A., Perelman, A., Tart, A., Ganesh, A., El-
Kishky, A., McLaughlin, A., Low, A., Ostrow, A., Anan-
thram, A., et al. OpenAI GPT-5 System Card. arXiv
preprint, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.0
3267.

Suzgun, M., Yuksekgonul, M., Bianchi, F., Jurafsky, D.,
and Zou, J. Dynamic Cheatsheet: Test-Time Learning
with Adaptive Memory. arXiv preprint, 2025. URL ht
tps://arxiv.org/abs/2504.07952.

Team, Q. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv preprint, 2025.

URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.

10

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

A. Experimental Details

In this section, we provide additional details about our experiments from §4.

A.1. Additional Experimental Details

We now describe the remaining experimental details for the experiments in §4.2.

Coding environment For AGENTBENCH instances, we run the coding agent in a Docker container with basic tooling
(python, apt-get, uv, . . . ) and Internet access. Importantly, we remove the git commit history and all remotes. For SWE-
BENCH LITE, we use the Docker images provided by Jimenez et al. (2024). We let the coding agents access the web (either
via dedicated tools or through the command line) and manually checked that the agents do not cheat (e.g., looking at the PR
corresponding to the instance description). We find no such case of cheating, and web access represents a minority of the
tool calls (less than 1%). For CLAUDE CODE, we keep the Task tool enabled: it allows SONNET-4.5 to invoke sub-agents,
using HAIKU-4.5, to solve sub-tasks. For instance, a sub-task can be exploring the repository to find specific files.

A.2. Trace Analysis

Here, we detail the experiments from §4.3. In particular, we give the mapping used to aggregate tool names across coding
agents, analyze the correlation between the number of tool uses and whether the tool is mentioned in the context files, and
expand the trace analysis to the intent behind tool calls.

Experimental setup We recall the experimental setup from §4.3. Given a list of tool calls from an agent, we analyze
the frequency of each tool call. For tools included in the agentic framework (e.g., Read, Write, or TodoWrite), we record
the name of the tool being called. For shell commands, we use an LLM to extract (from the command and its output)
the concrete command that was executed (e.g., uv, pytest, cat) and to categorize the intent of the tool call (e.g., install
dependencies, run tests, read files). We build the categories iteratively. We start with an empty set of categories, and for
each shell command, we ask the LLM to assign it to an existing category if possible and otherwise create a new category.
As the LLM, we use GPT-OSS-120B, and the prompt is given in §B.2. Finally, we manually merge duplicate and closely
adjacent categories.

Table 3. Equivalence classes used to group the different tool calls.

Refining the tool names For Figure 6, we further
manually refined the tool names for readability.
In
particular, in Table 3, we map tool names from other
agents, namely CODEX and QWEN CODE, as well as
some CLI tools, to CLAUDE CODE tooling. Lastly,
for repository-specific tooling (e.g., pdm, ansible, or
opshin), we grouped them into the repo_tool category.

CLAUDE CODE tool CODEX

QWEN CODE

Edit

Write

Grep

Read

sed

sed, edit

apply_patch

write_file

grep, rg

grep

cat

cat, read_file, search_file_content

TodoWrite

update_plan

todo_write

Correlation between the number of tool calls and context files
In Figure 11, we show the average number of tool
calls depending on whether the tool name is mentioned in the context file. We find that, if a tool name is mentioned
in the context files, this increases its usage by the coding agents. For instance, uv, pytest, or repository-specific tools
(repo_tool) are used almost exclusively if they are mentioned in the context file. This means that instructions in the
context files are followed, and that a lack of instruction-following capabilities does not explain why we observe, in §4.2,
no gain in accuracy when using context files.

Analyzing intents of tool calls For the tool intents extracted by the LLM (334 different categories in total), we further
aggregate them into the following 10 categories:

• git: Repository and version-control operations (e.g., commits, branches, diffs, checkout, stash, status).

• model: Model lifecycle tasks such as downloading or loading models, inspecting configurations or parameters, and

running inference.

• env_deps: Python environment and dependency management (virtualenv or venv, installations, versions, lockfiles).

11

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 10.
Increase in the average tool use (grouped into high-level categories) when including LLM-generated (bright green) or
developer-provided (dark green) context files, compared to the average tool use without context files. For the high-level categories, we
use an LLM to categorize the various tool calls.

Figure 11. Average number of tool calls depending on whether the tool name is mentioned in the context files. For tool names, we
use the equivalence classes from Table 3, and consider a tool to be mentioned in the context file if any tool from the corresponding
equivalence class is mentioned in the context file.

• build: Building, compiling, or packaging code and producing artifacts or distribution packages.

• quality: Code quality and correctness checks (linting, formatting, type checking, validation or verification, schema

checks).

• testing: Running and reviewing tests (unit, integration, regression, sanity, pytest) and test results.

• run_exec: Executing workflows and scripts or commands (Python, shell, Django), including reproduction and debug-

ging runs.

• search: Discovery and inspection actions (search, find, grep, glob, list, view, show, display, inspect, parse).

• file_ops: Direct file and filesystem operations (read, write, edit, copy, move, delete, create, permissions, paths).

• system: System and miscellaneous utilities (processes, disk usage, environment variables, HTTP checks, checksums,

tool or device information, help).

In Figure 10, we show the difference in frequency of these categories with and without context files. The conclusion is
similar to that of §4.3: the presence of context files significantly increases the number of tests run by coding agents, as well
as the extent of codebase exploration and code quality checks.

12

0.00.51.0systemrun_execsearchtestingfile_opsenv_depsgitbuildqualitymodelSonnet-4.5012GPT-5.20.00.5GPT-5.1Mini0.00.2Qwen3-30BLLMHuman1ReadEditWriteTodoWritepytestpythonrepo_tooluvpipgit0123456Avg.#callsQwen3-30BReadTodoWriteEditWriteGreppytestpythonrepo_toolGlobfind01234567Sonnet-4.5EditWriteGrepTodoWritepythonlsReadpytestfindgit0246810GPT-5.1MiniWriteGrepEditpythonrepo_toolTodoWritepytestuvlsshell0123456GPT-5.2LLMHumanMentionedNotmentioned1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Figure 12. Resolution rate grouped by repository for four different models: without context files, with LLM-generated context files, and
with developer-written context files on SWE-BENCH LITE (top) and AGENTBENCH (bottom). For SWE-BENCH LITE in particular,
the majority of instances come from the same repository (django), making per-repository estimates of the success rate noisy.

A.3. Per-repository Success Rate

In Figure 12, we show the success rate of the different scenarios (NONE, LLM, and HUMAN) grouped by repository.
For both SWE-BENCH LITE and AGENTBENCH, there is no single repository where the presence of context files has a
significant impact. Nonetheless, for AGENTBENCH in particular, we see that the difficulty across instances is relatively
balanced, validating our approach to building the instances.

B. Prompts

In this section, we detail all prompts used throughout this work.

B.1. AGENTBENCH instances generation

We detail below the prompts used for filtering pull requests, setting up the instances, describing the instances, and generat-
ing the test cases.

13

050100astropydjangomatplotlibseabornflaskrequestsxarraypylintpytestscikit-learnsphinxsympySonnet-4.5050GPT-5.2050GPT-5.1Mini02550Qwen3-30BNoneLLM1050100ansiblegraphitismolagentstransformersfastmcpoai-agentsopshinpdmpr-agenttinygradragaswagtailSonnet-4.5050100GPT-5.2050GPT-5.1Mini050Qwen3-30BNoneLLMHuman1Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

Filtering pull requests

You are evaluating pull request {pr_number} for suitability as a regression-test task in SWE-bench style datasets.
Decide whether the PR primarily introduces deterministic, testable behaviour. Such behaviors typically include bug
fixes, but can also include feature additions as long as it is possible to write a precise specification that allows testing
the new feature independently of the implementation.

Repository:

{repo_full_name}

Title:

{title}

Author:

{author}

Merged at:

{merged_at}

PR description

{body}

Diff excerpt
{excerpt}

Deliverables

1. Do not modify existing project code.

2. Create the JSON file

{decision_path} with UTF-8 encoded content describing your decision using this

schema:

1 {

2

3

4

5

6

7

8
9 }

"pr_number": <int>,
"suitable": <bool>,
"needs_manual_review": <bool>,
"decision": "include" | "exclude" | "manual_review",
"rationale": "<short explanation>",
"key_files": ["relative/file.py", "..."],
"risk_factors": ["<short string>", "..."]

• Set "decision" to "include" only when you are confident the PR is a self-contained bug fix that can be

validated via regression tests.

• Use "manual_review" if you are uncertain.

3. Stage the JSON file and finish. Do not stage anything else.

Setting up the instance

Your goal is to help developers set up their environment to run code in the repository and be able to run the current
tests. You should write a list of all commands needed to (i) set up the environment from scratch, and (ii) run the
existing tests. You need to make sure that the commands you provide actually work for you. The setup is considered
valid if most of the tests are passing after running exactly your setup commands and the test commands you provide.

Test runner requirement
To run the repository tests, create a file at the root of the repository called run_tests.py that:

• executes all tests,

• parses the test output,

14

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

• writes a JSON file at the repository root named test_results.json with schema:

1 {"test_name": <bool>, ...}

where each test_name is the name of a test and the boolean indicates whether the test passed (true) or failed
(false).

Deliverables

1. Create the JSON file {decision_path} with UTF-8 encoded content explaining the steps to set up the environ-

ment and run the tests (using the run_tests.py script you created):

1 {

2

3
4 }

"setup_commands": ["<command1>", "<command2>", "..."],
"test_commands": ["<command1>", "<command2>", "..."]

2. Create the script run_tests.py at the root of the repository.

3. Stage the JSON file and the script and finish. Do not stage anything else.

{example_files_section}

Describing the instance

You are given a pull request (PR) and the related issues for a given GitHub repository. Your goal is to format this
information into a clear GitHub Issue following the template below.

• For the Steps to Reproduce field, only write the steps you actually took to reproduce the issue in your specific

environment. Make those steps reproducible and minimal.

• Developers should be able to implement a solution similar to the one provided in the PR, but the Issue should

not leak the solution.

• Save your output in Markdown format in the file {metadata_relpath} .

Feature requests: Specification required
Additionally, for issues about adding a new feature (rather than fixing a bug), include a precise Specification
describing the desired behavior. It must be detailed enough to allow independent testing without relying on imple-
mentation details from the PR.

• Specify inputs (types, valid ranges, edge cases), outputs, side effects, and any required error handling.

• If the PR includes human-readable outputs (logs, UI text, error messages, . . . ), include them in the specification

and state that fixes must use exactly those messages.

Issue template (copy into your Markdown output)

15

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

1 ### Description
2 (Provide a clear and concise description of the problem.)

3
4 ### Steps to Reproduce
5 1. [Step 1]
6 2. [Step 2]
7 3. ...

8
9 ### Expected Behavior (if applicable)
10 (Explain what you expected to happen.)

11
12 ### Actual Behavior (if applicable)
13 (Explain what actually happened.)

14
15 ### Specification (if applicable)
16 (Provide a precise specification of the desired behavior.)

17
18 ### Additional Information
19 (Add screenshots, logs, or other helpful details.)

Data for PR # {pr_number} in repository {repo} at commit {commit_sha}

PR description

{pr_description}

Referenced issues mentioned in the PR

{referenced_issues_text}

PR patch

{pr_patch}

PR test (if any)

{pr_test_patch}

Key files identified during triage

{key_files_text}

Generating the test cases

You are generating regression tests for pull request

{pr_number}

in {repo} . The current checkout is the base

(pre-fix) commit {commit_sha} .

Problem description

{problem_description}

PR patch

{pr_patch}

PR test (if any)

{pr_test_patch}

Requirements

1. Focus on deterministic tests that expose the bug fixed by this PR. Tests should target expected behavior and
must not rely on internal implementation details (variables, hidden helpers, etc.). They should fail on the base

16

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

commit and pass on the merge commit (after applying the PR patch). You must verify this property. You may
apply the provided patch using git apply. If a specification is provided in the problem description, tests must
exactly align with it. Avoid tests that depend on incidental choices (variable names, function names, strings,
. . . ) unless explicitly required by the specification.

2. Create run_pr_tests.py at the repository root that executes only the tests you created, parses test output, and

writes JSON results to pr_test_results.json with schema:

1 {"test_name": <bool>, ...}

You may use run_tests.py as a reference. Note: your script should only run the tests you created for this PR.

3. Ensure new tests match the project’s existing test style and conventions. First review existing tests to understand

structure and framework. You may reuse tests from the PR if appropriate.

4. All new tests must be in new files created as part of this work. Do not modify any existing test files.

5. For test_commands, include any necessary steps (sourcing environments, setting variables, etc.) so tests run

correctly in a fresh shell.

Deliverables

1. Create the new test files with your proposed tests.

2. Create the JSON file {metadata_relpath} with UTF-8 content explaining how to run the tests:

1 {

2

3
4 }

"test_commands": ["<command1>", "<command2>", "..."], # Commands to run the PR tests with `

run_pr_tests.py`

"test_files": ["path/to/test_file1", "path/to/test_file2", "..."]

3. Create the script run_pr_tests.py at the root of the repository.

4. Stage the JSON file and the script and finish. Do not stage anything else.

B.2. Analyzing Traces of Coding Agents

To analyze the tool calls made by the coding agents, we use GPT-OSS-120Bwith the prompt below.

Analyzing coding agent traces

You are labeling a tool call with a single intent category.

Goal: choose a category name that is:

• Right-sized granularity: more specific than “execute command” but not tied to exact arguments.

• Reusable: should apply to many future tool calls.

• Clean: do not include file paths, flags, quoted strings, IDs, repo names, or counts.

• Format: 2–5 words, lowercase, verb + object (e.g., run tests, search codebase). Avoid too-generic names

like run scripts; specify what the script does (e.g., compile code).

17

Evaluating AGENTS.md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents?

You must also explain which tool is being used (e.g., pytest, rg, . . . ) in a dedicated field.

You will be given

• tool_call: the command or structured tool invocation

• tool_output: optional output text

Existing categories (use one if it fits):

{existing_tool_names}

Decision rules

1. If one existing category fits, use it exactly.

2. If none fit, create one new category that:

• is not tool-specific (avoid pytest, kubectl, terraform, etc.)
• would likely match 5+ future tool calls

3. If the tool call does multiple things, pick the primary intent as the category (mention secondary intents in

reasoning).

Return JSON only

1 {

2

3

4

5 }

"tool_name": "<category>",
"tool_used": "<specific tool or executable being invoked>",
"reasoning": "<1-3 sentences: why this is the primary intent; include key clues from call/

output; mention secondary intents if any>"

Tool call {tool_call}

Tool output (if any) {tool_output}

18

